STATE OF CALIFORNIA — HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES AGENCYCALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES
STATEMENT OF FACTS - HOMELESS ASSISTANCE
Important Information
If you have no place to stay or have received a pay rent or quit notice from your landlord, you may be able to get Homeless Assistance payments limited to once every 12 months, unless your homelessness is due to an exception. To get Homeless Assistance, you cannot have more than $100 in resources and you must either be eligible for CalWORKs or appear to be eligible for CalWORKs.
Exceptions to the 12 month limit are homelessness due to: domestic violence, physical or mental illness, or uninhabitability of the home. These exceptions are also limited to once every 12 months. Homelessness that is directly caused by a State or Federal declared natural disaster is also an exception.
If you received a pay rent or quit notice you may be able to get Homeless Assistance payments for up to two months of back rent.
If you have no place to stay, you must be looking for permanent housing to get Homeless Assistance for Temporary Shelter (TS). If you find someplace to live, you may get money for permanent housing.
You may get TS payments for up to 16 days in a row. The first day starts when you get the first TS payment. If you stay anywhere for free, or somewhere other than a shelter or business which rents rooms, you can’t get a TS payment, but the days count as part of the 16 days.
To get TS payments you must rent from a person or place that is in the business of renting property.
At the end of the 16 days, TS will stop. You will not be eligible to receive TS again for another 12 months, unless you have an exception, even if you have not used up all the TS benefits.
You will be asked to prove that your payments were spent on shelter. If you can’t, future payments will go to a shelter, landlord or others for you.
Instructions: Print all answers in ink. If you need help, ask your worker.
COUNTY USE ONLY
1.Name of Caretaker Relative (first, middle, last) {{cw42__name}}
DATE RECEIVED
Message Phone {{cw42__phone}}
A
Social Security Number {{cw42__ssn}}
--
B
Date of Birth {{cw42__dob}}
Mo. Day Yr.
C
CO
Aid Code
Case Number
AU
2.What is your current or last address? {{cw42__address}}
Number, StreetCityState
Zip
D
Case Name (Last, First)
E
Date HA Authorized
Mo. Day Yr.
3.Do you get Cash Aid? {{cw42__cash_aid}}
If "YES," in which county: {{cw42__cash_aid_county}}
YES
NO
F
Type of HA (check)
TemporaryPermanent
TVPV
TMPM
TUPU
TDPD
Start Date: Start Date:
Disposition:
Shelter arranged prior to TS Vendor payment issued
HA denied
4.Did you get Homeless Assistance from any county at any time? {{cw42__prior_ha}}
If "YES," complete:
Which county:When:
YES
NO
5. Does anyone in your home get income from a job or training program or any other source? If “YES”, list all income and who gets it below: {{cw42__income}}
YES
NO
6.List all liquid resources you own (include cash, checks, savings or checking accounts, credit union accounts, etc.). List each item and give its value. {{cw42__resources}}
7. If you get Homeless Assistance, you may have the payment made out to you or given directly to a shelter, landlord or other for you. Check (✓) below to tell us how you want the payment made: {{cw42__payment_pref}}
To YourselfTo a LandlordTo a ShelterOther (explain):
Worker:
Total resource value:
If you do not have a permanent home, fill out questions 8 through 12. If you are asking for back rent, skip to questions 13 through 17.
8. Explain where you are staying now. {{cw42__where_staying}}
9. How long have you been there? {{cw42__how_long}}
10. Do you pay for staying there? If "YES," how much? {{cw42__pay_to_stay}}
11. Explain why you have no place to live. {{cw42__why_homeless}}
12. Are you seeking permanent housing? Explain: {{cw42__seeking}}
YES
NO
What day did you get a pay rent or quit notice? {{cw42__eviction_date}}
301650175714
How many months of back rent do you owe? {{cw42__months_back}}
301650166221
How much is your monthly rent? {{cw42__monthly_rent}}
301650166221
Why didn’t you pay your rent? {{cw42__why_unpaid}}
301650178945
Why is your Landlord evicting you? {{cw42__why_evict}}
I understand that:
CERTIFICATION
2921008266I understand that I must provide proof that:
Homeless Assistance Temporary Shelter (TS) and Permanent Housing (PH) payments are limited to once every 12 months, unless I have a verified exception.
There is a limit on how much Homeless Assistance I can get.
I am required to give my Social Security Number, which will be used to check identity and verify that I am not getting aid in more than one case, one county, or one state.
I am homeless; or I have received a notice to pay rent or quit.
I am homeless due to an exception, if I have already gotten homeless assistance.
I used the TS payment for housing, and that if I cannot, I must have my homeless assistance payments made out or given to a shelter, landlord or to others for me.
I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the United States of America and the State of California that the information contained on this Statement of Facts - Homeless Assistance is true and correct.
29210087809
SIGNATURE OF CARETAKER RELATIVEDATE
298450277534
292100291293