Santa Clara CountySocial Services Agency
621792159396Department of Employment & Benefit Services
WOULD YOU LIKE TO REGISTER TO VOTE?
YOU MAY REGISTER TO VOTE IN CALIFORNIA IF YOU:
Are a United States citizen;
Are a resident of California;
Are at least 18 years old by the date of the next election;
Are not in prison or on parole for a felony conviction; and
Have not been judged by a court to be mentally incompetent.
IMPORTANT NOTICES
Applying to register or declining to register to vote will not affect the amount of assistance that you will be provided by this agency.
If you would like help in filling out the voter registration application card, we will help you. The decision whether to seek or accept help is yours. You may fill out the application form in private.
If you decline to register to vote here today, that information is confidential and may not be used for any purpose other than voter registration. If you register to vote here today, the agency or office at which you are registering is confidential.
If you believe that someone has interfered with your right to register or to decline to register to vote, your right to privacy in deciding whether to register or in applying to register to vote, or your right to choose your own political party or other political preference, you may file a complaint with the Secretary of State by calling toll-free 800-345-VOTE (8683), or write to: Secretary of State, 1500 11th Street, Sacramento, CA 95814. For more information on elections and voting, please visit the Secretary of State’s website at www.sos.ca.gov.
If you move to a new address, or if you change your name or political party, you must fill out a new voter registration card.
We will retain this Voter Preference Form with this agency. If you choose to register today, we will send your completed voter registration card to the county elections office.
IF YOU ARE NOT REGISTERED TO VOTE WHERE YOU LIVE NOW, WOULD YOU LIKE TO APPLY TO REGISTER TO VOTE HERE TODAY? (Check One)
23317210996I am already registered to vote at my current address, or I am not eligible to register to vote, and do not need an application to register to vote.
23317210361YES. I would like to register to vote. (Please fill out the attached voter registration card.) NO.I do not want to register to vote.
(NOTE: IF YOU DO NOT CHECK ANY BOX, YOU WILL BE CONSIDERED TO HAVE DECIDED NOT TO REGISTER TO VOTE AT THIS TIME.)
Please sign your name here:
Signature
Date
56235548453FOR AGENCY USE ONLY
Voter registration form completed:
YES
NOMailed to client on
Case Number:
Case Name: County Worker Number:
FOR AGENCY USE ONLY
Voter registration form completed:
YES
NOMailed to client on
Case Number:
Case Name: County Worker Number: